.TH EMA-XPS 1 "September 12, 1996"
.SH NAME
EMA-XPS v2.1.6 \- A Hybrid Graphic Expert System Shell
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ema-xps
[
.B -kbs
.I path
]
[
.B -kb
.I file
]
[
.B -ext
.I ext
]
[
.B -run
]
[
.B -pty
]
[
.B -csr
]
[
.B -gui
]
[
.B -dbg
]
[
.B -pad
]
[
.B -bw
]
[
.B -help
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR EMA-XPS 
is a hybrid graphic expert system shell based on the
ASCII-oriented shell Babylon 2.3 of the German National
Research Center for Computer Sciences (GMD). In addition to
Babylon's AI-power  (object  oriented  data representation,
forward and backward chained rules - collectable into  sets,
horn clauses, and constraint networks) a graphic interface  
based on the X11 Window  System  and  the  OSF/Motif  Widget
Library has been provided.
.PP
To avoid collisions of the two programming techniques (event
oriented vs. procedural style), two separate programs solve 
these  different  jobs.  The  first  one   works   event   
oriented. It initializes a bidirectional pair of interprocess
communication channels using one pseudo teletype  (like  xterm).
In  advance  it spawns  a  LISP-world containing the features
of Babylon and the extensions for interprocess communication.
.PP
In addition to the AI-features of Babylon it offers a  task-
processor. For  the  input of knowledge specialized editors
have been realized.  Additional  support  is  granted  by  a
tracer.  At  session time a flexible and widely configurable
full-screen application and popup dialogs are available. The
user  may choose to ask for explanations on the state of the
inference process. For information on how to use
.BR EMA-XPS
at run-time,   an   interactive   help  facility  is  provided.
Meanwhile the on-line documentation of the Babylon syntax is
offered this way, too.
.PP
Beginning with version 2.1 of
.BR EMA-XPS
knowledge  base  files of the shell
.I `babylon 3.1-beta''
from VW-GEDAS (which is no more available) can be loaded, too. Those KBs are translated into
.BR EMA-XPS
style KBs at load-time (see the release notes).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "-kbs " path
Sets up the search path for knowledge base files to be loaded to
.I path
which may be an absolute or relative description. It defaults to the ``.''
directory.
.TP
.BI "-kb " file
Specifies the name-part of a knowledge base file to be auto-loaded by
.BR EMA-XPS 
at boot time. The filename of a KB is assumed to consist of the three parts 
.I path/file.extension.
.TP
.BI "-ext " file-extension
Specifies the default extension for knowledge base files. Its default value
is 
.I ``kb'' 
which means that
.BR EMA-XPS 
is looking for files matching ``path-presets/*.ext-preset''.
.TP
.B -run
Automatically run a autoloaded KB at boot time. The KB must have been
selected uniquely using some/all of the options 
.I \-kbs,
.I \-kb,
and
.I \-ext.
.TP
.B -pty
(For debugging only) Like in xterms initing the interprecess communication channel may hang.
This option displays more verbose what is done while looking for free PTYs.
.TP
.B -csr
(For debugging only) This option prints out a warning message, any time, unexpected
synchronisation signaling is done. 
.TP
.B -gui
(For debugging only) Makes booting more verbose while setting up the
graphic user interface.
.TP
.B -dbg
(For debugging only) Displays additional information on the state of the interprocess
communication. Additionally adds output to a file named /tmp/xx_dbg_<pid>.
Should be used for interprocess communication protocol enhancements only!
.TP
.B -pad
(For debugging only) With this switch set, the LISP debugger PAD is set to be visible 
during boot time. Its common use should not be necessary.
.TP
.B -bw
If you prefer running 
.BR EMA-XPS
in a black-and-white mode, e.g. when working on a grey-scale monitor, you
might wish to set this option. 
.TP
.B -help
Displays a helpful message on the use of the options of 
.BR EMA-XPS .
.PP
.SH REFERENCE
The AI-means of Babylon2 are written in CommonLISP, which is described in
.RS 1
      Guy L. Steele Jr.: Common Lisp - The Language.
      Digital Press. 1st edition 1984, 465 pages.
      ("CLtL1" for short)
.RE
.TP
This has been superceded by
.RS 1
      Guy L. Steele Jr.: Common Lisp - The Language.
      Digital Press. 2nd edition 1990, 1032 pages.
      ("CLtL2" for short).
.RE
.TP
Babylon itself is described in
.RS 1
      T. Christaller, F. Di Primio, A. Voss (Editors):
      The AI-Workbench Babylon.
      Addison Wesley. 2nd edition 1999, 888 pages.
.RE
.TP
The enhancements of EMA-XPS to Babylon are documented in
.RS 1
      http://wmwap1.math.uni-wuppertal.de/EMA-XPS/
      (english, for short) and
      http://wmwap1.math.uni-wuppertal.de/EMA-XPS/DOC/
      (german, more complete).
.RE   
.TP
Those two WWW documents are part of the distribution, too.
.RS 1   
      Their locations are
      file:/<...>/EMA-XPS/doc/en/index.html
      and
      file:/<...>/EMA-XPS/doc/de/index.html
      respective.
.RE
.PP
The
.I <...>
hereby names the absolute path to the location, where
.BR EMA-XPS
has been installed. This is preferably the
.I /usr
or
.I /usr/local
directory.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I xps, rxps
startup scripts to be installed into 
.I <...>/EMA-XPS/bin
or something similar. This directory should be mentioned in your $PATH 
variable. Additionally
.I <...>/EMA-XPS/man 
should be mentioned in your $MANPATH variable.
.TP
.I ema-xps, rema-xps
full version and runtime version of the graphic process (main executable)
residing in 
.I <...>/EMA-XPS/lib 
directory.
.TP
.I emalisp, remalisp
full version and runtime version of the LISP process (the AI-shell itself)
residing in 
.I <...>/EMA-XPS/lib
directory.
.TP
.I ema-xps-init.cl
user-specific LISP initialisation file, resides in 
.I <...>/EMA-XPS/lib
directory, too. Per default it tries to load files of the same name from
your HOME directory and the current directory. 
.TP
.I *.kb
default extension of knowledge base files, typically placed into
.I  $HOME/kbs 
directory or similar.
.TP
.I $HOME/ema-xps/*
This directory typically contains the EMA-XPS sources. It may be removed after
installation.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LANG
specifies the language of EMA-XPS. Currently only 
.I ``deutsch'' 
(for german) and 
.I ``english''
are supported. The startup scripts check valid settings. Language
support is granted using Xresources only. Users are encouraged to add further 
language support. Send suggestions to the E-Mail addresses at the end of this 
man page. 
.TP
.B XAPPLRESDIR
This variable is preset by the starter scripts to correctly define the
absolute position of the 
.I <...>/EMA-XPS
directory. If you wish another placement of the EMA-XPS tree,
read the file INSTALL and preferably use the tiny program
.I patch
shipped with this distribution to modify the
the starter scripts xps, rxps, emalisp and remalisp appropriately.
.TP
.BR HOME
is used for determining the location of the user's home-directory.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR clisp (1)
.SH BUGS
.PP
In case of an unexpected death of the ema-xps process 
killing the emalisp process as its child may fail.
.PP
In some critical situations the interprocess communication may hang.
.SH PROJECTS
.PP
Clean PACKAGE handling of KBs (currently everything takes place within the
BABYLON package).
.PP
Support of more natural languages. Accepting values like 'en_US' in $LANG, too.
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Special thanks to the Babylon2 core team at the GMD and to Bruno Haible et.
al. for their decisions to offer
.I ``free'' 
software. These were necessary prerequisits to start such a project.
.SH AUTHORS
Hans Groschwitz, Karsten Vossberg, Stephan Peters, and many others ...
.SH E-MAIL
<hans@wmwap1.math.uni-wuppertal.de>
